Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
part two of our three-part mini-series
on the theme of “university”.
In case you missed part one, it was on
the history of the university, from its
earliest days in medieval Europe, through
to the colossal industry it is today.
Next up, in part three, we’ll be
looking at the scandal of Trump
University, the university that,
legally speaking, is no longer
allowed to call itself a university.
But today we will be talking
about universities in the UK.
How do they work, how are they
different from universities in
other countries, and what is life
like at university in Britain?
Perhaps surprisingly, I’ve had many
requests to make this sort of episode,
often from people who are considering
applying to study at a British university.
So if this is you, I hope it’ll be
interesting, and even if you have
absolutely no intention of ever
studying at a British university, I
hope it’ll be interesting nonetheless.
OK then, with that out of the
way, let’s get right into it.
It is a perfectly reasonable
statement to say that, as far as
its place on the world stage goes,
the UK is not what it once was.
From global politics to economic
power, the UK is clearly less
important than at almost any
stage in the past 500 years or so.
However, there is one area
in which the UK still packs a
sizable punch: higher education.
Its universities.
Out of the top 10 universities worldwide,
according to the most recent QS World
University Rankings, the UK has four.
The US has another four, and the remaining
two are ETH Zurich, in Switzerland, and
the National University of Singapore.
The UK is home to some of the best
universities in the world, and the 150
or so universities in the UK educate
almost 3 million students every year.
To put it another way, one out of
every 23 people in the UK is currently
enrolled at a university, and according
to the most recent census, 1 in 3 adults
in the UK has a university degree.
I am one of them, and in fact, I have
degrees from two different British
universities, so in this episode, I will
talk you through what it is like to study
at a British university more generally,
as well as share my own experience.
So, let’s start at the beginning, and
here I’ll give you some background
to how education works in the UK.
In the UK, education is compulsory
up until the year you turn 18.
But it’s compulsory with
a caveat, an exception.
When you are 15 or 16, most people take
exams called General Certificate of
Secondary Education, or GCSEs for short.
Some subjects are compulsory, like
English and Maths, but there is an
element of choice, so not everyone needs
to study drama or French or philosophy,
or things that are deemed less vital.
You can leave the traditional school
system after this, but technically you
need to enrol in some form of training:
an apprenticeship or something like that.
If you want to go to university,
you have to continue for two more
years and study for your A-levels.
86% of people do this, according
to the latest government data.
Here, you drop a bunch of subjects that
you would have studied for your GCSEs,
and you only choose your favourites,
the ones you are best at, or perhaps the
ones your parents insist you must do.
Most students choose three or
four subjects, and it’s already
at this point that a student needs
to be thinking about what they
might want to study at university.
In your final year at school, so
the year you turn 18, you need
to start the application process.
In Britain, this all happens through
a centralised system called the UCAS,
which stands for the Universities
and Colleges Admissions Service.
Essentially UCAS is a middleman, and
allows you to apply to up to five
universities in one go, all together.
You don’t write to every
university individually.
Now, not every university has every
course, and some universities are
particularly well-known for certain
courses and weaker in others.
So, there is typically someone at your
school who will help you figure out
whether university is right for you,
which courses could be a good fit, which
universities to apply for, and generally
guide you through the application process.
So, you choose your five universities
and the courses you’d like to apply for.
In terms of how the application process
works, your school includes your grades
so far, as well as your predicted grades
at A-Level, your predicted final grades.
Of course, there are all of your
personal details, and then the other
important bit is the personal statement.
This is a single essay, up to 4,000
characters long, so roughly one side
of A4, where you have to explain why
you want to study that subject, what
makes you suitable, and what wider
reading or experiences you’ve had.
Alongside a written reference from
your teachers, essentially a letter
of recommendation, and your predicted
grades for your A-levels, then this is
all sent off to your chosen universities.
Then you…wait.
The most selective universities
also require you to come and
have a series of interviews.
In my case, I applied for Oxford,
University College London–or
UCL–Bristol, Exeter, and I think
Manchester was the last one.
I was invited to interviews at both
Oxford and UCL, where I was grilled
on my motivations to study there,
asked about things I’d included in
my personal statement, and so on.
My interviews at Oxford didn’t
go very well, but my interviews
at UCL did go pretty well.
And sure enough, I was offered a
place at UCL, but not by Oxford, thank
you, but no thank you, I was told.
The other universities, which were
still good but not ranked quite as
highly as Oxford and UCL, didn’t
ask me for an interview, but
offered me a place in any case.
And here is a peculiarity of UK
universities, or that might be
different to how university works
in your country: the place you
are given is usually conditional.
That means the university will say,
“We will give you a place on this
course, but only if you get these
grades in your final A-level exams.”
And if you have multiple offers, they
might have different grade requirements.
So you might have an offer from UCL
that says you need to get three As,
or one from Bristol that says you
need two As and a B, but you need
to get an A in a particular subject.
When the exam results come
out in August, if you get the
grades, your place is confirmed.
If you don’t, you may lose your
spot, but there is a system called
Clearing that matches students with
universities that have spaces available.
And what happens if you don’t get any
offers from your chosen universities?
Well, this should be quite unlikely.
Someone at your school should have
advised you on the types of universities
to apply for, given your grades.
If you have excellent grades, then
you should be encouraged to apply
for the best universities, and if
your grades are not so good, then you
should be pushed towards universities
that are more likely to accept you.
So, you’ve got your offer, you’ve got the
required grades, and you’re ready to go.
Most British students move away
from home to go to university; it’s
unlike many European countries, where
most students will go to the closest
university and still live at home.
In the UK, people typically move away
from home and will spend their first
year in what’s called a “halls of
residence”, essentially a large building
with a mixture of single and double
rooms, depending on the university.
And as to what life is like in one of
these halls of residence, well, if you
put 500 or so British 18-year-olds in a
building together, many of whom have never
left home and who might have just received
their first batch of their student
loans, well, I’m sure you can imagine
a little of what life might be like.
And on that subject, we
must talk about finances.
As you may know already, or might
remember from the last episode,
there are some quite hefty tuition
fees at British universities.
University was completely free until
1997, then it was £1,000 a year, which
was what I was lucky enough to pay,
then it was increased to £3,000 for
applications after 2004, and then
increased again to £9,000 in 2012.
Interestingly and importantly, Scotland
is different; if you are from Scotland,
your home is in Scotland, the Scottish
government pays for your university
fees, if you go to a Scottish university.
If you go to an English university, you
pay the standard English tuition fees,
and people from England going to Scottish
universities have to pay the standard
tuition fees, they don’t get free tuition.
So most students from Scotland
stay in Scotland for university,
because they save on the fees.
And as for international students, well,
the sky is the limit in terms of fees.
There is no government cap,
so universities are free to
charge as much as they like.
For example, if you are an international
student and you’d like to study
medicine at Cambridge, it will cost
you £58,000 a year, so that’s €66,000.
I’ll be talking about domestic,
British students here, but that’s
how it works for international
students, as a point of comparison.
Living costs are a separate thing
altogether, and most students will
take out a loan from the government,
from a government-owned not-for-profit
organisation that gives out what are
called maintenance loans to students.
OK, so we’ve arrived at university, found
our halls of residence, paid for our
course and got our first loan payment.
What next?
All universities will have something
called “freshers week”, which is
basically a huge party week for
all new undergraduate students,
freshmen, or freshers for short.
And then begins the actual
business of studying.
Most undergraduate courses are
three years, some are four, and
more specialised ones like medicine
take 5 or 6, with additional
specialisations taking even longer.
One of my best friends from
university specialised in
neuroscience, and he has only just
technically finished his studies.
And we both started in 2006.
An important distinction between
British universities and universities
elsewhere, for example in the US, is
that in the UK you start your course
immediately; you don’t take a series of
general modules in your first year and
later decide what you specialise in.
You apply for a course, in my case,
French and Italian, and within that
course, there are certain modules
you can take: Dante or 19th century
French literature, for example.
You can’t apply for History and then
decide you’d like to take a module on
advanced statistics or microbiology.
You’d have to drop out of the course,
reapply, and start it all over again.
Another peculiarity of many
British university courses is
that there really isn’t that much
time spent in lectures, in class.
I think I had around 10 hours of
lectures per week for my class.
It might not sound like much at all,
especially if you are paying €10,000
a year for the privilege, but the
expectation is that you do a lot
of self-study and reading around
the subject in the remaining time.
Of course, not every university is
the same, but especially at the more
selective universities, a lot of your
time will be spent reading and studying
on your own, and then your contact
time with a professor will be spent in
discussion, and you are expected to have
done extensive preparation beforehand.
As part of my university studies, I did an
ERASMUS exchange and studied at university
both in Lyon, in France, and Naples, in
Italy, and I had considerably more contact
time with professors in both places,
but it was a very different style of
teaching; much more based on the professor
standing in front of a large group of
students and imparting their knowledge
to them rather than my experience at UCL,
which was much more collaborative: small
groups, back and forth discussion, and
more work out of the classroom than in.
So, that may or may not be
different from what university is
typically like in your country.
Another potential difference is that
in the UK, at most universities at
least, most modules run all the time.
In other words, you will be doing
all of your modules at the same time,
slowly over the course of the year.
My wife is a lecturer at a university
in Sweden, and with her course,
students take one module at a time
very intensively, so every day there
will be a lecture or some form of
tuition, but only for a period of a few
weeks, before they move on to another.
So, let’s move forward with our studies.
Depending on the course, students will
have a mixture of ongoing coursework
and exams at the end of the year.
In my case, it was almost all exam-based.
My course was four years, which
included a year spent studying abroad,
and each year counted progressively
more towards my final mark.
The first year was 10%, the
second 15%, the third another
15%, and the final year 60%.
Or something like that, and of
course, every university and
course will be slightly different.
And on the subject of marks, the UK
has a very specific grading system.
The top mark is a “first class”
degree, which is anything over 70.
Then you can have an “upper second
class” degree, or 2:1, which is a mark
in the 60s, a “lower class” degree, a
2:2, which is in the 50s, or a third
class degree, which is in the 40s.
Now, you might be listening to this and
thinking, “Hang on, you only need to
get a mark of 70 to get the top grade?”
In many university systems, students
get almost full marks, like an
Italian getting 30 out of 30 or
an American getting a GPA of 4.0.
If your university was like this,
I can imagine a mark of 70 sounds
like nothing to write home about,
nothing particularly special.
Not in the UK.
When I graduated, only around
10% of people got 70 and above.
Around half got an “upper second
class” degree, which is what I
got, and the rest got lower second
class or third class degrees.
So getting a mark above 70 is not
easy, and it’s incredibly rare
for a student to get above 80.
In my year, nobody got a mark of
above 80, and this has included
people who have gone on to teach
at places like Cambridge and Yale.
OK, so we have now graduated from
a British university, well done us!
What next?
Well, the real world of gainful
employment is waiting for us, or you
might choose to continue studying.
In my case, I did a Master’s
degree, partly because I had become
particularly interested in China
and in learning Mandarin, and partly
because I didn’t have a concrete
idea of what I wanted to do next.
I went to a different university for my
Master’s; I went to one called SOAS, which
is a specialist university for Oriental
and African studies, still in London.
And in terms of my experience, it was
slightly different to undergraduate,
in that the studying aspect was
taken more seriously, but the overall
format and style were similar.
So, to wrap things up, I spent five
years of my life at university, and
enjoyed almost every minute of it.
I was lucky enough to go to a very good
university, one of those four in the UK
that rank among the top 10 in the world.
Of course, university isn’t the right
choice for everyone, and many British
universities rightly come under criticism
for offering expensive degrees that
don’t deliver good value for money.
For me, it was a great choice, and
one I would make again in a heartbeat.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on British Universities.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
no matter whether you are a budding
17-year-old thinking about applying
to a British university or you are
77 years old and you can think of
nothing worse than spending Fresher’s
Week at a British university.
If you are interested in learning more
about British universities, we have
a couple more episodes that might be
interesting: episode number 276 is
all about Oxbridge [that's Oxford and
Cambridge universities], and episode 513
is all about the UK university crisis.
I’ll put a link to both of
those in the description.
And as a quick reminder, this
was part two of our three-part
mini-series on the theme of university.
In case you missed part one, we talked
about the history of university in
general, and next up, it’ll be the sordid
and scammy history of Trump University.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.